Welcome back.
In this lecture we begin to
talk about word meaning and
how to decide if two words
have the same meaning.
Let's look at some fundamentals.
You may remember from an earlier lecture
we talked about the difference between
lemmas and wordforms.
A lemma is a citation form that has
the same stem, the same part of speech,
some rough semantics, where a wordform is
the inflected word as it appears in text.
So for example,
the wordform banks has a lemma bank.
The wordform sung has a lemma sing.
And this is of course true for
all languages.
The Spanish word duermes has the lemma
dormir, the you sleep and to sleep.
Now each lemma can have multiple meanings.
So for example, the lemma bank,
we can have a sentence
like a bank can hold the investments or
the east bank.
So here we have some kind of
financial institution and
here some kind of sloping land, let's say.
So we call this difference, sense.
We say a sense, or
a word sense, is a discrete representation
of the aspects of a word meaning.
And so we want to say that lemma bank here
has two senses or at least two senses,
sense 1 this financial institution,
and sense 2 this sloping land.
The word homonymy means the situation
in which words share a form but
have distinct unrelated meanings.
We call the two words homonyms.
Homonyms, homonymy.
So bank 1, financial institution, and
bank 2, sloping land, are homonyms.
Similarly, bat 1, club for
hitting a ball, and bat 2,
a nocturnal flying mammal, are homonyms.
Now homonyms come in two forms.
They can be homographs.
That's words that are spelled the same,
whether or
not they're pronounced the same or
differently.
So bank and bat are homographs.
Or they can be homophones.
So write, W-R-I-T-E, and right,
R-I-G-H-T, sound the same but
they're spelled differently.
And sometimes homonyms are both
homographs and homophones, so bank and
bat are both homographs and homophones.
Sometimes they're only pronounced
the same but spelled differently.
Sometimes they're only spelled
the same but pronounced differently.
Homonymy causes a number of problems for
applications and
natural language processing.
So if you're doing information
retrieval and you ask about bat care,
we don't know if you have a pet flying
mammal or if you're a baseball fan.
And machine translation the similar
problem, if you say the English word bat,
in Spanish you might
mean the flying mammal or
again you might mean a baseball club.
Text-to-speech, the stringed
instrument called a bass is
pronounced differently than
the fish called the bass.
So if we're going to read the word out
loud in text-to-speech we have to know
which word we're talking about.
So consider these two
senses of the word bank.
The bank was constructed in
1875 out of local red brick.
And I withdrew my money from the bank.
Are those the same sense?
You might call sense 2 a financial
institution, so I withdrew my money from
this financial institution, and
sense 1 something about the building.
So here when I see this
bank was constructed,
I would mean the building
associated with the bank.
So these two senses,
the financial institution and
the building belonging to the financial
institutions, are related.
So when the two senses of
a homonymous word are related,
we call the word polysemous.
So a polysemous word has
multiple related meanings.
And most non-rare words have multiple
meanings, and so polysemy is quite common.
When the meanings between
related words are systematic,
we call this systematic polysemy or
sometimes metonymy.
So lots of polysemy is systematic.
So for example, words like school,
university, hospital,
all of these have the same
polysemy we saw for bank.
They can mean the institution or
they can mean the building.
So we say there's a systematic
relationship between buildings and
organizations.
There's other kinds of
systematic polysemy.
So we might refer to an author,
Jane Austen wrote Emma, or
her works, I love Jane Austen meaning
I love the books that she writes,
or Jane Austen is stored
on that shelf over there.
Trees, we might talk about
the blossoms of plums, or the fruit,
the plum I ate yesterday.
And again,
a systematic polysemy between authors and
works of the author or
trees and their fruit.
So lots of kinds of systematic
polysemy like this.
How do we know when a word
has more than one sense?
One test we often use is the zeugma or
zeugma test.
Consider these two senses
of the word serve.
Which flights serve breakfast?
And does Lufthansa serve Philadelphia?
Where here we mean give
a meal to a passenger, and
here we mean an airline
flies to a particular city.
And the zeugma test says
let's form a sentence
using both senses of the word serve and
see how bad it sounds.
So does Lufthansa serve breakfast and
San Jose?
Well, that sounds funny.
And so
since this conjunction sounds weird,
we say these are two
different senses of serve.
We say two words are synonyms if they have
the same meaning in some or all context.
So a nut can be called hazelnut by
some people and filbert by others, and
it means the same thing.
Or a couch and a sofa, or the words
big and large, or automobile and car.
So we say two lexemes are synonyms
if they can be substituted for
each other in all situations.
And if that's the case, we say they
have the same propositional meaning.
Now as it happens, there are very few or
perhaps no examples of perfect synonymy.
Even if many aspects of meaning of two
words are identical, they still may not
preserve their acceptability depending on
politeness or slang or register or genres.
So while water and
H2O technically mean the same thing,
in practice we're not going to use H2O
to describe our beautiful day in
the mountains looking at a running stream.
And even big and large,
which seem like they might be synonyms,
have different meanings
in different situations.
Let's look at that.
So we might say, how big is that plane?
Or would I be flying on a large or
a small plane?
And it sounds like the senses of big and
large are the same there.
They seem like synonyms.
They both refer to a measure of size and
were large on some scale of size.
But consider these sentences.
Miss Nelson became a kind
of big sister to Benjamin.
Miss Nelson became a kind of
large sister to Benjamin.
But here big and
large mean very different things.
Big sister means older sister here, and
large sister simply
can't have that meaning.
It means a physically larger sister,
which is a funny kind of meaning.
And so we want to say that big here
has a sense that large simply lacks.
There's a sense of big that means older,
or grown up, and
large just lacks this sense.
So sometimes even if two words
seem to have very similar meaning,
some of the senses may be
different between the two words.
And that tells us that synonymy is really
a relation between senses rather than
a relationship between words.
So we say that one of the senses of big,
the one meaning physically large, and one
of the senses of large, meaning physically
large, see, it's hard to define, isn't it?
Both of those senses, those senses
are in a synonymy relationship but
not the entire words.
Another important relationship
in the word senses is antonymy.
So antonyms are senses that are opposites
with respect to one feature of meaning and
otherwise very similar.
So we have dark and light,
Short and long, fast and slow.
All these are words which
had very similar meanings.
Short and long both mean I'm a property
of length, and short just means I'm at
this end of the scale and long means
I'm at the other end of the scale.
So more formally, we say antonyms
define a binary opposition or
they can be at opposite ends of the scale,
so two kinds of antonymy.
So in long and short and fast and
slow we have this binary opposition.
Or they can be reversives.
So in a verb like to rise or
to fall or the words up and
down, they're not at different ends of
the scale, they're different directions.
So we say the reverse of directions.
So two kinds of antonymy.
Again, relationships between senses,
specific kind of
relationship between senses.
And perhaps the most important
relationship between senses that we'll see
is that of hyponymy and hypernymy.
So we say that one sense
is a hyponym of another
if the first sense is more specific or
denotes a subclass of the other.
So we say that car is a hyponym of
vehicle, mango is a hyponym of fruit,
so another word for
hyponym might be subclass or subordinate.
And conversely, hypernym or
superordinate, I try to remember
this by saying that hyper is super.
Here we have vehicle is a hypernym of
car meaning it's a supertype of car.
Car is a subtype of vehicle.
Vehicle is superordinate of car.
Fruit is a hypernym of mango.
And so I've given you some examples here
with the superordinate like vehicle and
the subordinate like car.
So hypernyms or hyponyms,
hypernyms, hyponyms,
or superordinate,
subordinate will be synonyms here.
Now more formally, we say that the class
denoted by the superordinate, or
hypernym, extensionally includes
the class denoted by the hyponym.
We can define hyponymy also by entailment.
We say a sense A is a hyponym of sense
B if being an A entails being a B.
And hyponymy is usually transitive,
so if A is a hyponym of B and
B is a hyponym of C,
that entails that A is a hyponym of C.
And another common name for this hyponymy
hierarchy is the IS-A hierarchy.
Intuitively, we say A IS-A B, or
A ISA B sometimes without the dash.
Or we also sometimes
say that B subsumes A.
And we'll see all of these terms,
ISA, hyponymy,
subsumption hierarchy,
as we proceed through the course.
We often make a distinction between
hyponyms and instances, and WordNet,
the thesaurus we'll talk about in a bit,
has both classes and instances.
An instance is an individual,
a proper noun that is a unique entity.
And so we say San Francisco,
that instance,
is an instance of the class city.
So instance is a relationship
between an individual and a class.
City is a class, and so we can say
city is a hyponym of municipality or
location or other kinds of classes.
So hyponymy or subsumption is
a relationship between a class and
another class.
Instance is a relationship between
an individual and a class.
These are some of the fundamental
definitions we'll need in talking about
extracting word meaning.